[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>The idea that some
ancient civilizations
had high technology
and engineering, much
as we do today, fascinated me.
So I enlisted the help of
British Engineer Christopher
Dodd.
But before we met in
Egypt, I visited him
at the Danville
Metal Stamping plant.
>>OK.
We've moved beyond
now what it takes
to actually cut something.
How were they checking it, how
were they guiding that tool?
Because obviously,
they had to have
had some metrology instruments.
They have to engage
metrology instruments
to be able to verify that they
were maintaining parallelism
between this surface and the
opposing surface like that.
And you just don't get that
by line of sight or saying,
oh, we'll get Joe
on the job today
because he's got
really good eyesight.
>>Now, see, I'd
be good with some
of that in small grooves and
stuff like you're saying there.
But that one--
I mean and so basically,
the conclusion
on these artifacts and a
lot of the other artifacts
that we're looking
at is they were using
tools that no longer exist.
They're not in the
archaeological record anymore,
they do not exist anywhere.
And so then the
question, is, OK what
are the minimum requirements,
what's the minimum tooling
level or technology, if you
were, to be able to do this?
And this is the most striking
example, where people just go,
whoa.
Because for you as an engineer
and also an expert machinist,
inside corners mean
something to you, right?
>>Sure.
>>Yeah.
5/32 of an inch inside corner
on those boxes, top to bottom.
Now, that photograph
is a little blurred.
>>Now, that's not two
pieces coming together?
>>No.
>>That's just a square
granite fill, solid block,
consistent all the way down.
>>Mm-hm.
>>And why would they
really have to be so
precise is what blows my mind.
>>Now, this is how they would--
conventionally, they
would say this is how
they built something like that.
And then for squaring
something off,
of course, the way
a carpenter will
swear to frame, obviously
measure from corner to corner,
which is low tech compared
to what we have here.
And you verify that
with a piece of string.
I mean that kind of
precision you can't
verify with a piece of string.
So that's what we're faced with.
And there's not just one there.
It's not like they
got lucky on one box.
There's over 20 of
them in this facility
down in the rock tunnels
near Saqqara in Egypt.
>>So I'm back to they had, like
you mentioned earlier, they
had hundreds and hundreds of
people spending hours and days
and months and years
doing this stuff.
>>But let me take you back
to the historical information
on the serapeum, OK?
You know what they were supposed
to be using for those boxes?
They were burying the apis bull,
which was a revered animal, OK?
The apis bull's lifespan
was supposed to be 20 years
and they say that when an
apis bull was selected,
they would stop
building his burial
tomb-- this is Egyptologists.
>>Is that what they're saying?
OK.
>>So 28 years.
Now, they've also
done some time studies
on how fast they can
remove granite using
the ancient Egyptian tools, OK?
Now you use the
material removal rate
of the old methods and the
bull's long gone by the time,
using the maximum
number of workers
that you can actually
get in the work site.
And you're not talking 28 years,
you're talking 50 plus years.
And that's just roughing
the bloody thing out,
that's not even
[INAUDIBLE] it finished.
>>So now we're talking
power tools, right?
>>Exactly.
>>OK, right.
>>From what I'm seeing there,
I'm looking at that picture
and there's tool marks on it.
Anything we machine,
though most of what
we machine there are
tool marks, you just
don't see them because
they're so minute.
But also because
the feed of the tool
controls that surface finish.
If you plow down through a
piece of any kind of material,
you're going to have
a rougher surface.
If you go slower, the
feed rate's slower,
the RPMs are
faster, you're going
to have a nicer,
smoother finish.
So this blows me out of
the water a little bit.
Because of those tool
marks, that's telling me
they wasted no time
cutting through this thing.
>>OK.
>>Now I've been talking
lapping and all this.
>>That's a fade rate of
100,000 per revolution, which
it would be difficult to
achieve that in aluminum
using carbide tools,
let alone in granite.
>>Right.
And
>>So basically, what
you're looking at
is something that
is only explained
if you consider non-conventional
types of machining.
>>My first impression
was with very little
historical background that
all this was done by hand.
It was lapping and chiseling and
took many hours, days, weeks.
It took a large amount of time.
But after looking at some of
the granite that I've seen,
I question if it was even
feasible to do by hand.
And it kind of leads
me into directions
of thinking about the
application of machine tools,
for lack of a better,
some time ago.
>>I think all the evidence
in Egypt indicators
that there was a high
civilization in pre-history.
Now, when we look at the
tools and the technology
available to the
ancient Egypt, we
have to consider
that the culture that
built the pyramids, that built
all these other monuments
was far older because
the tools do not exist
for that particular epoch.
It doesn't matter what
site you go to in Egypt--
whether it's Abu
Gorab, Abu Rawash,
whether you go into the
temples in Upper Egypt--
there is always some
signature of technology.
And that signature is
actually the machine tools
that were used and the marks
that they left in the stone.
And those marks and not
just the cutting marks,
but the geometry of the stone.
I don't think it's
an exaggeration
to assert that a culture
that has the genius
to devise these wonderful
miracles of engineering
limited that expertise
and genius with just
the design of the product.
They have had to have had
the tools to match the job.
>>According to Chris'
theory, the ancients not only
had electricity, but they
had power tools as well.
Chris shares my interest
in ancient technology,
so I had him take me
around Giza for a day
to look at things from an
engineer's perspective.
One of the great
mysteries of the past
is the enigma of the colossal
cities of the ancients.
How were they able to quarry
and move these giant granite
blocks?
Many of the stones are extremely
hard and difficult to cut,
such as basalt and granite.
How did the Egyptians build
these complex geometric
wonders?
Did they use brute force or
some kind of high technology?
So what we've found
here on the Giza Plateau
is one of these granites
blocks that's been contoured.
Chris is going to check it
with his precision tools
to see if there's some
indication of modern machining
techniques here on the granite.
>>What we have here is a prime
example of modern machining.
We have a contour, not a true
radius, but it's a contour.
And the contour is precise.
If you look at
the surface gauge,
you'll see that
there's very little
light that's showing between
the interface and the granite.
The gauge is accurate
to within 1/10000
of an inch, which 1/20 the
thickness of a human hair.
>>Wow.
>>Yeah.
>>It's very uniform.
There's some
imperfections, but probably
if I was to estimate
how precise it was,
I mean I would say from
5/1000 of an inch, which
is quite remarkable really.
>>OK.
Really?
>>Yeah.
Over that entire contour.
Now, the features of this
stone, you have this radius
here that the blends into--
it's almost like it goes
straight into the blend radius
at the face.
>>OK.
So obviously, I mean
you look at this
and you can say there's no way
you could turn it on a lathe
to achieve a true radius.
So they had to have had
a means of replicating
that contour with precision over
the entire length of the block.
>>OK.
And how would you do that?
>>Well, today we would do
it with like a CNC machine
or in the old days in
machine shops we'd do it
with a profiler, where
you would actually
follow a template
with a rotating
tool or a vibrating tool.
>>OK.
>>And continue
that, step it over
and continue that contour with
precision right to the end.
Now, this is where it
becomes interesting
because you need to get a
really good shot of this corner.
OK.
So now what we have here
is what we recognize
in modern manufacturing--
and actually, it's an
engineered or design feature--
if you want to marry or fit
an object with a sharp corner
with a face and also be able
to use a tool to create this
that has a greater
rigidity and stability.
So you would use a larger
tool, and this is done with
like a ball radius
tool, endmill.
So this radius would have
been done with a ball endmill,
or what we call a ball endmill,
where the bottom of the tool
is actually shaped like
a ball, half a ball.
But the really
interesting part of that
is this relief, the
way it comes down.
>>The undercutting and
this groove right here.
OK.
>>And as you can see, you
have the larger radius here
but anything that
would fit up against it
could have a smaller radius.
OK.
So that is a unique feature.
Now, the other thing is
the size of the radius.
So that is going to
require another tool.
>>So if you were just bashing
this out with a dolorite ball,
you wouldn't have this
undercutting like that.
>>Well, actually, they
wouldn't have bashed this out
and achieved this.
>>They could never have bashed
this out and achieved this.
>>No.
I'm going to melt
this forming wax
and press it into the corner.
And actually, that looks good.
I'd actually done that
previously so that I already
had the shape of the radius.
>>So OK.
Now you've got a wax
form of the radius
and you can use that to check
the consistency of the radius.
>>Correct.
And so if you check this
radius, even in this corner,
OK, where you have one,
two, three surfaces actually
meeting, and if I slide
it along that radius,
we get pretty much
the same radius
except for this flat part
because evidently, it came out.
There's a-- I think it must
be a larger radius there.
But when you get down into
here, let me look at that.
Yeah.
So you have a consistent radius.
And the question is,
for something like this
to get something even remotely
close to a perfect radius,
it would take a tremendous
amount of time by hand.
But then to replicate that
along the length of the block.
>>Right, to keep it so
uniform is just so much effort
to do that.
>>Right.
>>But if you're using some
kind of machining tool,
it would happen naturally.
You couldn't do
it any other way.
>>That is correct.
Yeah.
That is correct.
We have the other
half-- or not a half,
but the portion of the block
that has been broken off.
Evidently, they took
the end off and it
doesn't have the same features.
But the basic geometry is the
same and as you slide it down,
the radius is fairly close.
Obviously, there's going
to be some imperfections,
but that's a precision
radius gauge, 15/32 radius.
See, that's incredible.
I mean that speaks volumes,
to find something like that
on something so ancient.
I would have to use a modern
instrument or a modern gauge
gauge to check its precision.
>>Well, and would a
millimeter gauge--
I mean it doesn't matter whether
it's inches or millimeters.
>>No.
A radius is a
radius is a radius.
>>Right.
>>No, it wouldn't matter.
>>When you have the whole
thing of the pyramid inch
and them using
those measurements,
but that's not what
you're looking at.
>>No.
It doesn't matter whether it's
in inches, millimeters, cubits,
whatever, pyramid inches.
>>The length is the length,
the radius is the radius.
>>Right.
I mean it's the
consistency and accuracy.
This is not quantatative
by any means,
because for that
you'd really need
to have some measuring
instruments to check
coordinates on it.
Today we would use a CMM
machine, a coordinate measuring
machine, and check it that way.
Now, of course, the
other part of it
is that if you had
a precise template
and you fit it to
the template, then
you could create that contour.
But the evidence of machine
work is his in this block,
it's in other blocks.
The mountain of evidence that
we find is in the serapeum,
in those giant granite boxes.
>>And it's kind of
these inside corners
that are so difficult to make
without machine tools, right?
Is that kind of what--
>>Yeah.
I mean this is not done
with a dolorite pounder.
>>Or a chisel, for that matter.
>>You wouldn't.
No.
No, not a chisel.
Not a chisel.
>>So you have to
ask yourself, why
would they even want some curved
piece of granite like this
and then go through the
effort to actually create it?
>>Well, that's a question
that I've asked myself.
And the obvious question
is, why would they do that?
Because it doesn't
resemble anything
that would fit with a statue.
It's obviously for construction.
But in construction,
we don't work
with this kind of precision.
>>OK.
Yeah.
All right.
>>And there's another
piece of evidence
that we'll look at down
in the Valley Temple,
on the south side of
the Valley Temple.
>>Of the Seven Wonders of the
Ancient World, there's only one
left, and that's the
Great Pyramids of Giza.
What secrets do they hold?
And what we see here
are basalt paving blocks
on the southern
side of the pyramid.
But here we find
something curious.
We see actually saw
marks here in the basalt.
And in fact, this
big saw mark here
is going far behind
inside this block.
And it would appear to
be all modern sawing,
however apparently this was
done not in modern times,
but in ancient times.
Yet looking at this
cut, it must have
been made by something like a
machine tool and a diamond saw.
This is not something
that could have
been made with crude tools
like a copper chisel.
Here we also see saw cuts.
We can see a saw cut
right here along the edge
of this basalt block.
This, too, appears to
be done with some kind
of a modern tool, yet
this cut was apparently
done in ancient times.
Were modern
construction techniques
used in the building
of the pyramids
or were they built with stone
balls and copper chisels?
>>Well, we know that there's
been cataclysms in prehistory.
Nobody can argue that.
The only thing that
argues against it
is some of the
conventional evidence,
archaeological evidence, for
the time period of the pyramids.
But if you look into
that time period that's
ascribed to the building
of the pyramids,
you don't find the tools.
They're nowhere to be found.
And I believe you have
to go back earlier.
There has to be an
earlier civilization that
suffered a huge cataclysm,
was totally wiped off
the face of the planet.
>>And here, this whole
is kind of like the doors
at Machu Picchu.
So we're here at the
pyramid Abu Rawash.
Not many tourists
come to this one.
It's on top of a
mountain and appears
to be have been buried in some
kind of landslide or something.
Yeah.
This is like a rock-cut ramp
right through a solid mountain
and then they've lined it
with large limestone blocks.
It's like the entrance
here to the pyramids.
One of the alternative
theories on building
the pyramids, one
that's been proposed
by a French chemist
named Joseph Davidovits,
is that the pyramids
were actually
poured into place
and the blocks are
a form of molecular concrete.
We know that the Egyptians
used a form of concrete,
the Romans used a
form of concrete,
the Mayans used a
form of concrete.
And here at Abu Rawash,
just outside of Giza,
we're also seeing the
extensive use of concrete.
There is extensive
granite down here
inside the pit of the
pyramid of Abu Rawash.
And granite is not
found here at Giza,
so any granite is coming from
the Aswan quarries, which
are 500 miles to the south.
Chris is saying
that there must have
been a roof over this
giant pit at one time.
You can see part of it.
But there would have been
apparently massive stones,
lintels, spanning this roof.
It must have been huge.
Here's a very
interesting granite slab
here at Abu Rawash.
It shows all the
indications of having
been cut with a modern saw.
It's been smoothed and
you can see, in fact,
the saw marks on the block.
>>Well, you know what, David?
There are certain
features to this
that really don't lend to
the theory that it was sawed.
>>Really?
>>Yeah.
>>You see this cut right
here where the cut ends?
>>Yeah.
>>OK.
Well, it's on a radius.
All right?
And it goes this way.
A very large radius.
>>OK.
It's marking--
>>It's like that.
Yea.
Now, if you're going to be
using a saw, you won't get that.
It would be impossible.
>>It would be impossible.
>>If you're sawing
from here to here,
regardless of what you use,
it would be impossible.
I mean you whatever cut
that had a radius to it.
Now, the question is, is it a
true radius, what size is it?
Obviously, it's quite
huge because it probably
goes out to there, the radius.
>>So what kind of
a tool would you
say is would be used
to cut that, then?
>>Well, I mean I've seen similar
features in a machine shop, OK?
>>OK.
>>All right.
And that's another
feature on this.
If you have like a milling
cutter, a very large milling
cutter, and it's
tilted on an angle,
then you're going to cut a
large radius on the surface.
OK?
Actually, you're cutting
more of an ellipse.
But if you are covering
the area enough,
then it's going to
appear like a radius.
In fact, there are calculations
used in tool and die-making
that give you the
angle, the tilt,
of your tool associated with the
diameter of the tool that will
give you a specific radius.
>>OK.
>>Yeah.
I mean this is
remarkable because it
has all those features.
Now, OK, forgetting
that, if we come back
to this particular object, what
tool actually created this?
That, to me, is--
I don't know of any primitive
method that would create that.
We have a feature
right here where
evidently, it came
into a particular area
and then it went off track.
So they lifted it up and
proceeded on because you've
got a ridge there.
>>Yeah.
>>Right?
You can see it.
I feel it.
>>Yeah.
>>So they're starting to cut--
>>But the interesting
thing is when
you look at the
striations on the block,
because you can see
them right here,
it does appear that it was
a tool that was radiused.
Of course, one could
argue that they
used a saw that
was somehow curved
and had one fellow on one side
and another fellow on the other
and they were just
doing this business.
But the problem with that is how
did it create this curve here?
And so if we take
this straight edge,
you'll see that there's
a light in the center.
>>Right.
So it's slightly dished out.
>>It's slightly dished out.
And as you track
across the surface,
that light does not go away,
nor does it change much.
Fascinating.
>>So I mean in the mainstream
Egyptology explanations
of bashing this out
with a stone using
copper chisels, that would
be impossible in your mind
to create this?
>>Well, you wouldn't
create something
like that bashing it out.
There have been some
experimental tests.
There has been
experimental work done
where they have cut granite
using a copper saw and hand.
But to the extent that they
would actually create something
like this is quite remarkable.
Not only that, look
at the size of it.
That's quite a large saw.
>>This is a very
interesting block.
I mean so in your
mind, this is evidence
of modern type of machining,
advanced machining,
but done in ancient times?
>>I would say that
if we were looking
for evidence of ancient methods,
I won't expect to see this.
If I was in a
modern machine shop,
this would not surprise me.
>>With this fascinating
block of granite
that appears to be sliced
by a giant diamond saw,
this is the kind
of thing that I'm
hoping we're going to find
in the Altiplano of the Andes
in Peru and Bolivia at
Pumapunku and other sites there.
This is the ancient
sun temple of Abu Garab
on the edge of the
western desert of Saqqara.
This ruined pyramid area once
contained an obelisk at the top
and all around it
are scattered blocks
of granite and alabaster.
Here at Abu Garab, there is
evidence of ancient machining.
Chris, what do you think about
this block here of granite?
>>Well, as you can
see, David, there
is a hole that's actually
been core drilled.
And it has similar features
to the hole and core
that Petri described
in his book, "Pyramids
and Temples of Giza" and
which I wrote in my book.
And the striations
are visible there.
It would be difficult to find
out if it's actually a spiral,
but if it's anything like the
core that is found in the Petri
Museum, then those
striations do form a spiral
down the entire length of it.
>>And that would be only done
with some modern machining type
tool.
>>That's what I concluded, that
it was some kind of sonic core
drill.
>>A sonic core drill doing that.
>>Right.
>>And what is the
mainstream explanation
for a hole like that?
>>Oh, the mainstream explanation
for doing this kind of work
is to use copper and
sand and essentially
rotate the copper
in two directions,
OK, with a bow drill.
>>And is it a hollow
copper tube then?
>>A hollow copper to
attached to a piece of wood
where you rotate the
wood and the copper
by wrapping the string
around it and attaching
the ends to a piece of wood.
>>Like a bow and a drill?
>>Right.
And then you just
rotate it that way.
But the problem with
that method, though,
is that the core in the Petri
Museum shows that the spiral is
only in one direction and also
the feed lines or the feet
rate-- that's the distance
each striation has,
the distance the drill goes
in a 360 degree rotation--
is almost 1/8 of an inch, which
is an incredible feed rate.
And we see striations here.
And like I said,
it's very difficult
to really tell whether they
are a continuous spiral down
the length of it.
But still it's
quite interesting.
>>Yeah.
This is what they call
the alabaster altar
here at Abu Garab.
It's a curious star shape made
with about four giant slabs
of alabaster.
And it also shows some
evidence of ancient machining.
>>Yeah.
Well, what we have here
is a perfect circle
cut into the stone.
And essentially,
it looks like what
they did is they came down with
a core drill in this corner
right here because you have
that machined as a depression.
That would have
left a central core.
But then what they
would have done
is machined this surface in to
meet this feature right here.
So they started out with a
hole and then machined that.
You see the difference
in tool marks
or the difference
in geometry here.
You have the geometry
of this tool, which
has a larger radius
here, and then you
have the geometry of the drill.
And so they drill that
out, knocked the core out,
and brought this in, and
then cut this onto a radius.
And there are one, two,
three, four, five, six, seven,
eight of these features
around the block.
Now, what they were intended
for, it's a mystery.
>>Yeah.
What is the purpose of all
this and even why they would
cut this out like this is--
>>And there's another
of these features
over on that other corner except
that it's not a full circle,
it's just like a half a circle.
>>And so if you
were actually doing
this with very slow,
laborious hand drilling thing,
you probably wouldn't have
overcut it like this, right?
>>Well, I mean I'm not saying
that that's necessarily
the case.
But the problem that we have
with the conventional theory
of cutting stone, such as
bashing with stone chisels
or just grinding it
while lapping it is why--
these surfaces are very
smooth, OK, but you'll notice--
some of the surfaces
are smooth, but you'll
notice that the alabaster
is very brittle.
>>And has crystals in it.
Yeah.
>>Yeah.
And so this is not a stone
that you would actually
bash with another stone
to achieve this kind
of smoothness and flat surface.
So they created this
creature as a relief
so that a mating
part or a mating
object, something that would
fit snugly over the top of it--
>>OK.
>>Because if you follow
this surface here,
it goes right into this area
here, where this radius starts.
OK?
So that's the only
explanation I have
for that, that
this is meaningless
except for clearance.
>>Clearance.
OK.
Other stone blocks, then,
were fitted down in here.
>>Or whatever it was.
>>Whatever it was.
OK.
Out of stone or even
possibly metal parts.
>>Well, whatever material that
was available in prehistory.
So this is another example--
and there are many of
them throughout Egypt--
of very, very high
proficiency in cutting stone.
And in my opinion, they had to
have had advanced technology.
And here is the other
feature right here
where you have that circle,
which is actually a half.
OK?
And the same kind of features,
the same radius here coming
into the corner.
But this is a sharper
radius right here.
So you have a
sharp radius there.
And to the life of
me, I can't understand
why they found these necessary.
But obviously they had a need.
I mean today in manufacturing
we have lots of weird shapes.
And here's another one.
See?
>>Yeah.
>>But this is further
away from the corner.
>>From the corner.
Yeah, right.
>>So it's quite fascinating.
>>So it's clear that they
started each of these niches
by first coring down here and
then cutting away the rest.
>>Yeah.
So evidently, what
I would suggest
is that something fit
on top of this thing
and these surface
are on an angle.
And so whatever
fits slipped on here
and they cut this
out as a relief.
And so whatever fit on it came
into this surface right here.
And so what you have
is a relief like that.
>>That's great.
And now-- wow, look
at this, you guys.
Here's a saw mark on this
circular piece look at that.
It's been cut in.
Now, how did they do that?
>>I think we need to
get up on top so that we
can examine it more closely.
Basically, you're
going to start here,
you're going to reach
the top of the radius,
the maximum distance,
and then taper out.
So I'm going to insert this
room key and we'll check it out.
>>It gets deeper there
and then it gets shallower
and comes back out again.
Yeah.
>>Right.
That's fascinating.
Well, with this feature
and all the other features
that surround us, I am totally
convinced that this platform
was designed to
hold something else
and then lock it into position.
Because tightening
just this feature
alone indicates that they were
placing something on there.
Because otherwise, why have it?
>>I mean this is a pretty
sophisticated and modern
engineering way to fit
giant blocks or even
some kind of machinery
or something, right?
>>Well, it's not
sophisticated or even modern--
modern by our terms.
Ever manufacturing first
started, it's a common feature.
They use it to attach
objects to shafts,
they will cut something like
that and then drive a screw
and hold it together.
>>And of course, there
would be like, say,
four of these around this
circular thing, yeah,
to attach things.
>>But then with
the other features
that indicate that something
actually was dropped on here,
it all begins to
make more sense now.
>>And do you think
that this was also
probably cut with like a
circular saw, some machine
tool?
>>Well, yeah.
I mean this I would say
with the weight of evidence
throughout Egypt, obviously
they were using machine tools.
But this could have
been cut with anything.
It's a very, very
simple features
and there's not much material--
>>To remove there.
OK.
Sure.
>>Look at this one here, David.
How did it get here?
It's suspended like a dolman,
but it's actually on the corner
right there.
>>Yeah.
It's touching on, like,
three points here.
It's a huge blob of limestone.
That's huge.
These are weird.
Wow.
So here we have a
very curious series
of megalithic alabaster bowls.
They're scooped out,
there's a hole on one side
to let some liquid out.
Each one has these curious
cogged features on it.
The cogged features also have
small uniform drill marks
going on them.
It almost seems like they're
a form for something else
to fit over.
What do you think, Chris?
>>Yeah, I think so.
Looking at these, I would say--
and we will take a different
view of them--
but what I would
suggest is that these
were the bases for a column
that fit down into here.
And then perhaps the
column itself had a hole--
>>A hollow going
all the way down.
>>All the way through it.
And then probably it collected
water from a gutter above.
>>OK.
>>OK?
>>Yeah.
>>And then the water drained
into these bowls and out
of that hole.
>>OK.
Now, there are some of
these on the other side
of the pyramid that
are in situ so we
could take a look at those.
>>OK.
And you think these
have actually then
been moved here by--
>>Yeah.
Yeah, these have
been moved here.
Yeah.
And you will see that
clearly when you look
at the ones that are in situ.
>>OK.
Looking at the west
side of the pyramid
here at Abu Garab, which once
had an obelisk on the top,
it appears that this
whole pyramid was just
destroyed in some giant
cataclysm, some big earthquake
that just destroyed it and
scattered these blocks around.
Is that what you think?
>>Yeah.
Essentially what I described
earlier in that there
was a huge cataclysm.
All these m which
were finely tuned
to the resonance of the
planet, and the planet
was overloaded with energy
and they just vibrated apart.
And you can see some of
the blocks are cracked.
If we walk around
this side right here,
there's one actually
towards the center
of the pyramid, a huge
block of limestone
this appears to have been just
thrown up and then dropped
down and cracked.
>>And split apart.
It cracked.
Yeah.
I mean so the idea that it
would have been just somebody
came here and decided
to tear it down,
that would have been
extremely difficult, right?
I mean to just bring
these blocks down.
>>Yeah.
I mean they possibly could
have tumbled these down.
But why pick a block, tumble
it down, and then not use it
and leave it here?
>>Yeah, right.
I mean if they wanted to quarry
and wanted building material,
why not take these
stones with them?
>>Why not use the one that
you've already tumbled?
>>Yeah.
>>And what we have
here are hundreds
of blocks that have just
been thrown off the pyramid.
>>Thrown away.
So it's more like a natural
disaster, rather than
a man-made destruction.
>>Yes.
this is all just cut into solid
rock here, these chambers.
Man.
So these are the--
>>Coffins here.
The coffin and
the cover and they
covered it with wood
to make protection.
>>Protection for it.
But here it is-- here
are the giant sarcophagi
without a cover.
And that's the lid.
So it's weighing 85 tons.
And how much is
this lid weighing?
>>I think all covered and the
coffin it weighed 85 tons.
You have to go down [INAUDIBLE].
>>It's a really strange place.
We're deep underground here and
on either side are these bays.
And in these bays are these
giant, huge basalt sarcophagi.
They're incredible with
these huge lids and then--
man, these things,
they weigh 85 tons,
the lids weigh like 50 tons.
It's extremely
hard basalt. I mean
how they could move
these inside here,
it defies explanation really.
And it's such a
cramped, tight area
that you can't get a lot of
workers in here to do things.
It's amazing.
Man.
Wow.
Look how this is cut here, too.
You can see how it's suddenly
sloping down like that.
Man.
>>They tried to make
it [INAUDIBLE] here.
>>Wow.
How did they make it
so smooth and polished?
>>I think they are very
technical workers at this time
to make it very, very,
very soft to touch.
>>Wow.
Boy, these edges are
really square, too.
It's--
>>This one.
>>Yeah.
Here you can see the lid pushed
back, the sarcophagus is open.
It's been chipped
away right here,
probably trying to open it.
According to the
traditional Egyptologists,
these giant boxes
were sarcophagi
for the mummified bulls of Apis,
sacred bulls of ancient Egypt.
Yet the big mystery really
is how they could possibly
get boxes such
gigantic, 85-ton basalt
sarcophagi like this in here.
And in theory just to put
a mummified bull inside.
Here this is very smooth here.
A very uniform radius.
It's these inside
corners of a box
like this that are
so difficult to make
without modern machinery,
modern machining tools.
According to Chris, it's
basically impossible
to bash something like this out.
And you just have to
have modern machining
tools, modern sonic
drills and saws
to really make
something like that.
And even today, this would be
almost impossible to make, even
with modern machinery.
Wow.
This is just so amazing.
It's so smooth along the
sides of this basalt.
It's so smoothed out and
then it's been etched here.
Yeah.
Here you see the edges here
of the box, the sarcophagi.
It's all chipped here,
probably from crowbars going in
to try and lift this
25-ton lid off the top.
It's all bashed in and
chipped on this corner.
But otherwise, it's just so
smooth, such a perfect corner
here.
Wow.
It's really amazing.
Oh, wow.
I'll just see if I can lift
this 25-ton lid up a little bit.
There we go.
I can just hold it
up for a few seconds.
There.
That's about it.
Whew.
This is the 85-ton granite
box that's unfinished.
It's still rough.
You can see right
here in the corner.
But the lid is now
on the other side.
So apparently, this was being
moved into the serapeum,
but in the end was
just left here.
Some Egyptologists
think this was probably
being taken out, although others
say it was being brought in.
You can see how it barely
fits in these tunnels,
this giant 85-ton
block, I mean how even
workers could be moving around
this while they theoretically
moved it in here.
It's really an enigma.
I mean how could they do this?
This is amazing.
It was an incredible day.
We still had time to
visit the mysterious Red
Pyramid, a pyramid with some
sort of chemical residue
inside.
All right.
Now we can move into
the main chamber now.
Watch your head.
Wow.
Look at this corbeled
ceiling here.
Oh, man.
This is cool.
Oh, wow.
That's high.
>>Let's have a
look through here.
[INAUDIBLE]
>>Yeah.
Yeah, it is really
similar, isn't it?
It's hot down here, too.
So do you think we're actually--
you don't think we're
underground here, are we?
We're more at the level
of the Giza Plateau.
>>We're not underground,
but we're right at the--
>>Right at ground level.
OK.
>>You can see [INAUDIBLE].
>>Look how perfectly these
blocks are fitted together.
That's incredible masonry.
Man.
There's a huge block right
here, lintel over the door.
So this is the main
inner chamber here, huh?
So it's three corbeled chambers
deep inside the pyramid.
There's a very strong
ammonia smell in here,
which would be from
perhaps chemicals that
were used in here at some
time or would it just be
from bat guano or something?
>>It smells just like ammonia,
doesn't smell like urine--
>>Uh-huh.
>>--which would have
a different smell.
It's smells like pure--
>>Like pure ammonia.
Yeah, or like
phosphate or ammonia.
I mean it's a really strong
smell, a very strong chemical
smell in here.
It's overpowering.
You almost can't stand it.
I mean you couldn't stay
down here very long.
[BANG]
>>What's that bang?
>>I don't know.
[BANG]
>>Wow.
There is certainly a
very strong resonant--
[BANG]
--echoing it within
these chambers.
It seems as if it's built--
[BANG]
--for resonance and sound.
>>Yeah.
[BANG]
>>And she's two chambers away.
>>Yeah, that's right.
Yeah.
>>One chamber, down
the passageway--
>>That's right.
And then she's down
that other passage.
Yeah.
Wow.
And she's just stamping her
foot on a wooden platform.
Yeah, that's something.
[BANG]
It sounds like
Godzilla is coming.
Here inside the pyramid,
too, we can really
see how perfect the
construction is,
how these massive
blocks of limestone
are perfectly fitted together.
You couldn't slip a piece
of paper or a knife in here.
You see how the joints all
come together extremely finely.
I mean this is really
precision construction.
This is the finest kind of
megalithic stone masonry
that we can find anywhere.
Back on the surface.
Daylight again.
That was quite a trip.
You don't have to be crazy
to drive in Cairo, helps.
How was the Great Pyramid built?
Was it built by thousands
of slaves as a monument
to a pharaoh, or did it
have some other purpose?
Today we will explore a
revolutionary new theory
on the purpose of the pyramids
and how they were built.
>>Obviously, they
reached the point
where they said, well, we've
got all this energy coming
through these things,
why don't we harness it?
So they build the
Great Pyramid and they
harnessed some of that energy.
>>I wanted to explore the
subject of the Great Pyramid
being some sort
of giant machine,
so I arranged to meet with
British engineer Christopher
Dunn in Cairo.
The first thing I
did was take him
to Giza, where he could explain
to me his theory of the Giza
power plant.
>>In "The Giza Power Plant,"
I questioned the theory
whether the pyramids
were actually tombs.
And after conducting
considerable research,
I could not find any
evidence that there
were any original burials
within the pyramids.
Of course, that
raises the question,
if they were not tombs,
what were they used for?
What I did is I examined
the Great Pyramid
and did a reverse
engineering study of it.
What I concluded was
that it was actually
used to generate energy and
generated energy in a way that
was extremely holistic.
It actually did more than
just generate energy,
it relieved the stresses
in the Earth's plate
and it also drove the
plate into harmony.
That harmony then
possibly could have
affected the people
in the area, creating
an acoustic environment that
was peaceful and extremely
beneficial to their health.
However, what leads me to that
conclusion are the details
within the Great Pyramid.
And what we have is a series
of passageways and chambers
and shafts.
It was a study of the
dimensions and the geometry
of these shafts and chambers
and the residual materials
that were left inside.
Also, the selection of
materials in particular areas.
In the Great Pyramid, we
have a descending passage
that goes down to
a bedrock chamber
about 350 feet from the opening.
Of course, we could
talk about the precision
of the Great Pyramid, and the
precision is considerable.
That passageway itself was
surveyed by William Flinders
Petri in the 1880s and he
determined through his measures
that the passageway was straight
in the constructed portion
to within 20/1000
of inch, that's
the thickness of a thumbnail.
Over the entire length of the
chamber, the full 350 feet,
it only varied 1/4 of an inch.
That is an amazing precision.
The sub chamber itself I
am now coming to realize
was actually using hydraulics
to cause a pulse generator.
It actually generated a pulse
that drove the entire pyramid
into harmony.
Of course, moving it
up into the pyramid
we have the ascending passage
and many unusual features that
are found there, such
as the granite stone
plugs at the end
of the passageway.
They don't seem to have any
real construction purpose.
While the theory
is that they were
that to prevent tomb
robbers from entering
the center of the
pyramid, really all they
did was attract attention.
And al-Ma'mun, when he chiseled
into the Great Pyramid in 812
AD, did so when he identified
those granite plugs
and determined that perhaps
something may lie behind them.
And sure enough, what lay
behind them was a shaft.
They chiseled the limestone
around them and a shaft
straight up into the heart
of the Great Pyramid.
Coming to the end
of that small shaft
is what they call
the Grand Gallery.
The Grand Gallery
is considered to be
an architectural masterpiece.
It consists of corbeled
layers, seven corbeled layers,
where the gallery actually
gets smaller towards the top.
Also, along the side
of the Grand Gallery
we have ramps and into the
ramps are cut these notches.
These notches are cut
vertically into the ramps.
There are 27 pairs
of these notches,
and as you go along the
length of the gallery
you come to what has being
called the Great Step.
Climbing up the step, you
have a horizontal passage
and then through the horizontal
passage a small antechamber,
then again another small
passage into the King's Chamber.
The King's Chamber complex is
the heart of the power plant.
It is constructed
solely of granite.
It is tuned to a high
degree to resonate at 440.
It also emits naturally
an F sharp chord,
and this was detected by
a acoustic engineer named
Tom Dannelly in 1995.
The chamber is freestanding
within the heart
of the pyramid.
It is not connected
to the core blocks
and is free to resonate
and vibrate at will.
Overlaying the King's Chamber
we have five layers of granite
beams.
These granite beams, I
speculated in my book,
are actually resonating beams.
They are unusually cut.
They're cut square and
flat on three sides,
but the top side is very rough.
The roughness on the
top side, I believe,
was done in order
to tune the beams.
Just like you would
tune a bell, you
would actually remove material
until you achieved the tone
that you wanted.
The whole complex is
like a musical instrument
and each feature lends a
resonance to the other feature.
In the King's Chamber, we
have a box, what I call a box.
Conventionally, is
called a sarcophagus.
However, there have been no
mummies, original burials,
found in any pyramid.
And there was nothing
found in the Great Pyramid,
even al-Ma'mun
entered in 812 AD.
So the question is,
what were these for?
Also in the chamber
are two shafts
that lead to the outside
of the pyramid on angles.
These shafts and the northern
shaft, they have a 4.8
by 8.4 dimension.
That is suitable for a
waveguide in the microwave
region, a hydrogen waveguide.
In the southern
shaft, the opening
is shaped like a horn antenna.
This is quite significant.
If you consider that a signal
coming into that chamber,
if that chamber contained
energized hydrogen,
that signal could stimulate
the emission of energy,
collect that energy, and feed
it into the southern shaft.
Other features-- well,
we asked the question,
if they were using
hydrogen, where
did they get the hydrogen from?
Well, for that we go along a
very long horizontal passage
to what is termed
the Queen's Chamber.
In the Queen's Chamber, you
have several unusual features.
You have two shafts, similar
but not quite the same.
In the Queen's Chamber,
you have a shaft
leading from the chamber
to the south and one
leading from the
chamber to the north.
When early explorers went
into the Great Pyramid,
they did not detect
these shafts.
You wouldn't have known
that they were there.
The only reason
they were found is
because a man in 1872 by
the name of Waynman Dixon
was in the chamber and
detected a crack in the wall.
He pushed a rod
through that crack
and he got no
resistance on the rod.
So he chiseled away
the limestone and lo
and behold, behind that
plate was the shaft.
He did a similar thing on the
northern face of the chamber
and tapped around and found that
there was another shaft there,
chiseled out limestone,
there it was.
These were intentional designs.
They did not cut
these shafts and then
just put a plug in them
at the Queen's Chamber,
they were a part of
the original block.
So the question is, why?
Why did they do that?
In 1993, a German
robotics engineer
by the name of
Rudolf Gantenbrink
sent a robot up
the southern shaft.
When he got to the
end of the shaft,
it terminated at what is
called a so-called door.
But the question is,
was it really a door?
And my answer is no,
it was not a door.
It was just a plate of limestone
and through this limestone
were two copper fittings.
So these were really mysterious.
And why would they
put copper fittings
at the end of the shaft?
The solution in the
Giza power plant
is that they were actually
electrodes and determined
when the shaft was full of
the chemical they were using
and mixing to create
hydrogen. Now,
you might ask, why was the
shaft closed at the end?
So we have a shaft that's
closed in two places, terminated
five inches away from
the chamber at the bottom
and with a plate of
limestone at the top.
Certainly, it wasn't for the
passage of air for people
to breathe.
And even though you may ask,
why would a mummy or a pharaoh
need to breathe if he was dead?
So that was another mysterious
question that we had to answer.
So the Giza power
plan theory actually
proposes that both
of these shafts
contained different
chemicals, a hydrated zinc
solution and a diluted
hydrochloric acid solution.
These two chemicals, if
mixed, would actually oil
off hydrogen. The evidence
to support that proposition
was found actually on
the walls of the shaft
and inside the southern shaft.
On the walls of the
shaft, early explorers
found that they were covered
with salt up to an inch thick.
They have subsequently
cleaned off the salt,
but the salt was there.
And that would be the result
of hydrogen gas boiling off
and giving up some of
the impurities in the gas
to the limestone.
So the evidence for
hydrogen is there.
The evidence that a liquid
was contained in those shafts
is very strong if you consider
that a five-inch plate
of limestone, liquid will
percolate through it,
whereas it would not pass air.
In the east wall is a niche.
The niche is corbeled.
I propose that it had an
evaporator tower there so
that the chemicals that
came into the chamber
were actually wicked up
into this evaporator tower
and gave off the
hydrogen. So let's
climb along the
horizontal passage again
and we'll go to the bottom
of the Grand Gallery.
The Grand Gallery is 82
inches wide at the bottom
and 42 inches right at
the top and 28 feet high.
It's quite an
impressive masterpiece.
I propose that within the
slots, of 27 pairs of slots
going along the length
of the Grand Gallery,
were a series of resonators
that actually coupled
with the permit
drew the vibration
and converted it to airborne
sound at different frequencies.
In other words,
at the bottom you
would have a larger
resonator and stepping up
to higher frequency
as you got to the top.
In 1999, I noticed evidence
that these resonators actually
were there, and that evidence
is on the walls and the ceiling
of the Grand Gallery.
Because in the past,
in history, there
was a disaster, a huge disaster.
And what happened was
I propose that there
was either a comet strike
or some external force
struck the planet.
This caused all this destruction
that we find around us
and what we have talked about
as we have gone around the Giza
Plateau--
the cracked blocks,
things thrown and jumbled
all over the place are
the signs of a cataclysm
many thousands of years ago.
Inside the Great Pyramid, the
evidence of that cataclysm
is around the King's Chamber
and the Grand Gallery.
With the use of
hydrogen and also
if you have the
introduction of oxygen
after the casing stones
were stripped off,
you would probably have
the right conditions
for that hydrogen to explode.
The evidence is
inside the chamber.
The walls were actually
pushed out over an inch.
The ceiling beams were pushed
up and they were cracked.
So what we had was an explosion,
the walls were pushed out,
the ceiling being
lifted slightly.
They fell down and cracked
along the south side.
Also in that chamber, the
sarcophagus or the granite box
is a different color than
the rest of the granite.
It is a chocolate brown color.
And I propose that that, too,
was a result of this explosion,
that the granite box,
originally a pink Aswan granite,
was subject to tremendous
forces and heat and as a result,
it literally cooked
like in an oven,
changing the color
of the granite.
If we go back out
through the antechamber
and onto the Great
Step and we look
at the ceiling of
the Grand Gallery,
we will see the evidence
of that explosion.
The walls of the
Grand Gallery have
the evidence of a tremendous
force, tremendous heat.
And I'm not the first
one to notice this.
There have been architects and
engineers who have been there
and said that the
walls are vitrifying.
The evidence is there to support
the Giza power plant theory.
And also, the design
of the resonators
because on the ceiling you
have these scorch marks--
very, very deep scorch marks.
The scorch marks
weren't very visible
until the pyramid
was closed for a year
and they actually cleaned it
and those scorch marks then
became very, very clear.
And what we have are
a pair of scorch marks
on both sides on the ceiling.
Also along the wall, there are
scorch marks that form a line.
Now, the blast pattern seems
to perform a line down,
centered with the slot.
So all this evidence
comes together.
But to sum it up, let me explain
everything and how it worked.
We start out with energy.
That energy is the
energy of the Earth--
seismic energy,
vibration-- feeding
through the Great Pyramid.
We collect that energy
in the Grand Gallery
and convert it to
airborne sound.
That sound and
the natural design
or the design of
the Grand Gallery
is such that any sound
generated in the Grand Gallery
will focus through that
small horizontal passage
into the King's Chamber.
There the sound actually
builds and accumulates.
It affects the
hydrogen in the area
and then you have a
microwave signal coming in
from the universe.
The signature of the Big Bang
is actually a hydrogen signature
at 21 centimeters.
So there we have
it, the evidence
of a sophisticated, intelligent,
and brilliant society
that creative energy
not in a way that
is harmful to the Earth or
the people that live on it,
but energy that resonated, that
was in harmony with the Earth.
Generating the energy, they did
it with harmony with the Earth
and drove the
Earth into harmony.
We've just scratched
the surface, though.
I believe there
is much more that
needs to be found and discovered
in Egypt about this lost
civilization.
We'll keep looking.
>>Chris' theory that
the pyramids were
some sort of power plant
tied into the resonance
of the Earth fascinated me.
I then wanted Chris
to show me evidence
that there had been some sort
of explosion that was associated
with the pyramids.
So if the pyramids were
coupled oscillators
and in this cataclysm,
some disaster,
the pyramids just vibrated
until they shook off
all this granite, then for the
later people who came here,
the stones were lying just like
this, just as we see them now.
And then people were trying to
quarry and split these stones,
but they were already
lying here scattered
and tumbled like we see
them right now, right?
>>Exactly.
>>Part of Chris' theory was
that the pyramids on the Giza
Plateau were driving
the Earth into harmony.
So I mean in your whole theory,
why these small pyramids?
They're also just mini big ones?
I mean they do the same thing?
>>Yeah.
Basically resonate at
a higher frequency,
but still doing the same thing.
And the theory is that
what they were doing
is they were causing,
for want of a better
term, a mini earthquake.
And it is--
>>They were creating
mini earthquakes.
OK.
>>Mini earthquakes.
>>To sort of relieve
the stress on the Earth.
>>To relieve the
stress of the Earth.
And so even today,
we're now talking
about say the Cascadia
fault in America,
where they are speculating
now that if they
set off mini
earthquakes, then you
relieve the stress in
the plates as one plate
presses against the other.
Right now, the
friction takes over
and they build up stress, build
up stress, built up stress,
and suddenly you've
got a 9.0 earthquake.
OK?
>>And if you can relieve
that, but with smaller--
>>If you can relieve
that, then you're
going click, click, click.
Mini earthquakes.
Vibration, which actually allows
the plates to slide smoothly
over each other, rather
than building up stress.
>>But in your whole theory
of the Great Pyramid
having a maze or energy,
but do these also
have some chemical
that's put in them,
or they're just a pure
geometric form on the Plateau?
>>Well, the Great
Pyramid is different.
And really just the
generation of energy
is not the prime purpose
for the pyramids.
The prime purpose for the
pyramids, in my opinion,
was to actually create
harmony, to drive the planet
into harmony and to relieve the
stresses of the Earth's plates.
Now, if you're able to do
that, if we could do that,
we can generate power
for decades, right?
>>Just from the stress
of the Earth's crust.
>>Yeah.
The point I'm trying to make,
David, is in our society,
electricity is
king-- power, energy,
we use it for many,
many purposes.
And we can sustain a
civilization for so long.
That whole civilization can
be wiped out by an earthquake,
by a huge uplift in the Earth's
crust can just totally destroy
everything, billions
and billions of dollars.
>>OK.
Yeah, right.
Just the tectonic plate shift.
We can't control it now,
but if we could control it,
we could harness power and
these pyramids could do that.
>>Bingo.
You've got it.
That's it.
That's what they were for.
>>Fascinating.
Fascinating.
>>And so you not only have the
smaller pyramids and the larger
pyramids, but you have
the different frequencies
to match with the different
frequencies in the Earth
because the Earth is a
jumble of frequencies.
They detected the hum
of the earth in 1998
and the hum is very,
very sub, sub frequencies
with a whole jumble of
different frequencies.
So the Great Pyramid
resonates still
in the King's Chamber to 440.
It resonates to
an F sharp chord,
as Tom Dannelly
detected in 1995.
>>OK.
>>And my theory is that
that energy is still being
channeled through the pyramid.
>>Through the pyramid, right.
>>And of course,
the King's Chamber
is a structure that's
freestanding within the center
of the pyramid.
It's not dampened by
the walls, it's not
connected to the core masonry.
The floor is not
dampened because it's
suspended on those.
The upper relieving chambers,
there are five layers of them.
Why?
>>Why?
Right.
>>And the whole purpose is
harmonics and resonance.
So what we have
is a progression.
And these were important
for the relieving
of the Earth's stress.
And so was the Great Pyramid.
However, obviously they reached
a point where they said, well,
we've got all this energy
coming through these things,
why don't we harness it?
So they build the
Great Pyramid and they
harnessed some of that energy.
>>Join us on our
next episode, where
we go to Peru to search
for ancient technology.
[MUSIC PLAYING]